       Page EDIT-089


        R4      EDIT BOXES                                               197

                1.      Read all notes at R3 and R4 to make sure that
                        they have been marked appropriately.

                    A.  BOX 1:  If R is/was "self-Employed," he should
                        be included in the "R'S EMPLOYER/FORMER
                        EMPLOYER" box.

                    B.  BOXES 3 & 4: These apply only to R's current
                        "SPOUSE/PARTNER".  If BOX 3 OR 4 is checked and
                        R currently has no SPOUSE/PARTNER, or does and a
                        marginal note indicates that the coverage was
                        obtained through an Ex- or Dead Spouse/Partner,
                        edit the response to "BOX 7" and note the
                        reason.

                    C.  BOX 7:  Read all entries in this box to see if
                        they are recodeable in BOXES 1-4 above.

                If R has insurance through an ex-spouse, deceased spouse
                or separated spouse, use code 7 at R4.

                If both "employer" and "union" are checked (for one
                plan) at R4 (both 1 & 2 or both 3 & 4 are checked)
                remove from "employer" box (1 or 3) and leave in "union"
                box (2 or 4).


        R6      At R6, any reference to R's coverage being paid for by a
                union should be coded as employer (codes 2 or 3).


        R14b, R17c,   Multiply otherwise uncodeable insurance payment
        R18c, (R37b,) amounts (e.g., R (says $.75 per week) to a per
        R40c, R41c)   year amount.  Use rounding rules only after
                      multiplying to a yearly amount.


        R17 & R18       COMPARE FOR DOUBLE-COUNTING BETWEEN R17 & R18    200
                                                                         201

                1.    Check any marginal notes and compare responses
                      between R17c-e and R18b-e to make sure that the
                      same policy is not counted in both places.

                  A.  If the only evidence you have is the same dollar
                      amounts at R17d and R18b, check with the Editing
                      Supervisor.

                2.    If R17c says "paid up", precode X94.
                      If R18c says "paid up", precode X96--none.
       Page EDIT-090


        R18c    If R gives only one amount for two or more policies,
                show Supervisor.


        R20a    CHECK FOR NOTES CONCERNING R'S GOVERNMENT HEALTH         202
                INSURANCE

                Read all notes for R20a to make sure that R understood
                the terms MEDICARE, MEDICAID AND VA/CHAMPUS. See the
                definitions in the gray-shaded box beneath the question.

                                    !!NOTE!!                                  

                VA/CHAMPUS covers active military, AND retired military
                AND some unremarried widows/widowers of the military.


        R26     CHECK FOR "ON AND OFF" COVERAGE                          203

                1.      If a marginal note (or the TN) indicates that
                        R's coverage is "on-again/off-again" (if for
                        example R is a seasonal worker not covered when
                        not working, or is usually covered but not when
                        laid-off and is currently laid-off):

                    A.  IF R IS COVERED AT THE TIME OF INTERVIEW, but is
                        usually NOT covered for part of the year:

                        1)  EDIT R3 TO "2. YES, BUT ONLY WHEN R IS
                            WORKING" by printing a "2" to the left of
                            BOX 1 and underlining it.

                    B.  IF R IS NOT COVERED AT THE TIME OF INTERVIEW,
                        but will be when he returns to a job which he
                        works at seasonally or from which he is laid off
                        but expects to return:

                        1)  EDIT R3 TO "4. NOT NOW, BUT WHEN R RETURNS
                            TO THEIR JOB HE/SHE WILL BE" by printing a
                            "4" to the left of BOX 1 and underlining it.


        R27     READ NOTES AND EDIT BOXES                                203

                If both "employer" and "union" are checked (for one
                plan) at R27 (both 1 & 2 or both 3 & 4 are checked)
                remove from "employer" box (1 or 3) and leave in
                "union" box (2 or 4).

                1.      Read all notes at R26 and R27 to make sure that
                        the correct box has been marked.
       Page EDIT-091


                        Note that although Q. R26 asks about R2's
                        coverage, the boxes at R27 are in terms of R1.
                        Thus, the "SPOUSE/PARTNER" referred to in Box 3
                        and 4 is THE SAME as the "SPOUSE/PARTNER" whose
                        coverage is of concern.

                    A.  Thus, IF BOXES 1 OR 2 ARE CHECKED 1 or Plan #2:

                        1)  Check R3 to determine whether R1 has
                            insurance;

                        2)  If R1 does not have insurance (R3 is checked
                            "no"): edit R27 to "3" or "4", whichever is
                            appropriate for each plan.

                2.      If a marginal note indicates that the coverage
                        was obtained through R2's Ex- or Dead Spouse/
                        Partner, edit the response to "BOX 7" and NOTE
                        the reason.


        R29     Any reference to R's coverage being paid for by a union
                should be coded as employer (codes 2 or 3).


        R37     CHECK R14 TO SEE IF SAME PLAN AS R1'S                    205

                1.      IF R37 IS CHECKED "YES":

                    A.  CHECK TO SEE IF R14 (ON PAGE 199) IS ALSO
                        CHECKED "1. YES";

                    B.  IF IT IS: COMPARE R14a & b WITH R37a & b.

                    C.  IF THEY ARE THE SAME, (i.e. the same box is
                        checked at R14a and R37a and the same amount is
                        reported at R14b as at R37b, and R indicates
                        that the amount reported pays for both plans),
                        edit R37 to "3". Yes, same plan as reported at
                        R14" by printing "3" to the left of the "NO"
                        box and underlining it.  Otherwise, do not
                        assume that the same boxes checked and the same
                        amounts reported imply that R pays for both
                        plans with the amount reported at R14, and do
                        not edit R37 to "3".


        R37b, R40c,  Multiply otherwise uncodeable insurance payment
        R41c (R14b,  amounts (e.g., R says $.75 per week) to a per year
        R16c, R18c)  amount.  Use rounding rules only after multiplying
                     to a yearly amount.
       Page EDIT-092


        R38a    MAKE A CARD IF THERE IS A RESPONSE IN "7. OTHER"         205

                If there is a response written in the "7. OTHER
                (SPECIFY):" BOX, write it on a card with the CASE ID #,
                "R38a" (the item number), the date and your initials
                and put it in the card box on the Editing Supervisors
                desk.


        R40     CHECK FOR SAME PLAN AS R17                               206

                If there is a note indicating that a policy reported at
                R40 is the same as one reported at R17 and the payment
                for the second policy is included at R17c, code R40c
                "X95. Payment included in R17c."


        R41     CHECK FOR SAME PLAN AS R18                               207

                If there is a note indicating that a policy reported at
                R41 is the same as one reported at R18 and the payment
                for the second policy is included at R18c, code R41c
                "X95. Payment included in R18c."


        R40c    If R40c says "paid up", precode X94.
        & R41c  If R41c says "paid up", precode X96--none.


        R41c    If R gives only one amount for two or more policies,
                show Supervisor.
       Page EDIT-093


                      ____________________________________

                      HEALTH AND RETIREMENT STUDY (WAVE I)
                          General Editing Instructions
                                  SECTION S
                      ____________________________________


        Q#                                                               P#
        __                                                               __

        S1      VERIFY THIS CHECKPOINT                                   208

                If "1. R WIDOWED IN 1991 OR 1992" is checked, check the
                last marriage listed at A14 and A15 on page 4.  A14 must
                be "5. Widowed" and A15 must be "1991" or "1992".  If an
                inconsistency is found, bring the Iw to the Editing
                Supervisor.




        CONGRATULATIONS, YOU HAVE FINISHED THE INTERVIEW!
       Page EDIT-094


                      ____________________________________

                      HEALTH AND RETIREMENT STUDY (WAVE I)
                          General Editing Instructions
                                  GLOSSARY
                      ____________________________________


        Adjustable life insurance:  Cash value life insurance that lets you
                change the death benefit, premiums, and other aspects of the
                policy.

        Adjustable mortgage loan:  See Adjustable rate mortgage.

        Adjustable rate mortgage (ARM's):  Also known as a variable rate
                mortgage (VRM), or adjustable mortgage loan (AML).  A
                mortgage where the interest rate on the loan goes up or
                down.  Normally, the rate is based on an index, termed the
                "interest rate adjustment index," and can change only at
                preset periods (called the "interest rate adjustment
                period").  Movement in the rates and/or payments is often
                limited, or "capped."  In some cases the rate can change
                in a preset way (A "graduated payment mortgage") or the
                mortgage can be converted to a fixed rate  mortgage (a
                "convertible mortgage").

        Adjusted Gross Income (AGI):  Total Federal taxable income.  Equal
                to total gross income minus some deductions for items like
                alimony, moving expenses and IRA contributions.  This is
                the amount reported on line 31 or the IRS form 1040.

        Agency bonds:  See Federal agency bonds.

        Amortized loan:  Any loan with a fixed number of equal-sized loans
                which, when paid, pay off the entire loan balance (and
                interest).  Most fixed-rate mortgages and consumer
                installment loans are amortized loans.  The number of years
                of payments is called the "amortization period."

        Annual percentage rate (APR):  This refers to the interest rate
                charged on a loan.  The APR is the "true" rate that lenders
                are required to use in their advertising.  It is the annual
                interest rate charged on the average outstanding balance on
                a loan (the amount you would pay if you owed this balance
                for a year).
       Page EDIT-095


        Annuity:  A promise to pay a certain amount each month or year until
                a person dies.  Most pensions are annuities.  They can also
                be purchased directly from insurance companies.  With a
                "deferred annuity" you pay premiums until a certain age when
                you start collect payments.  The payments and premiums are
                fixed for "fixed annuities"; the payments depend on the
                investment performance of fund for "variable annuities."  An
                "immediate annuity" is one where you pay one large premium
                and start collecting immediately.  An "annuity certain" is
                an annuity which lasts for a preset number of years
                regardless of whether you are still alive.

        Asset:  An item that one owns.  Assets may be financial or non-
                financial in nature.

        Assumable mortgage: The buyer of a home takes over the payments and
                obligations of the seller's mortgage.

        Automatic transfer of savings accounts (ATS):  A type of bank
                account which is a combination of checking and saving. Funds
                are "automatically" moved into the checking portion of the
                account when checks are written.  Functionally, it is the
                same as an interest-bearing  checking account.

        Automobile Finance Company:  These are sales finance companies
                affiliated with Automobile Manufacturers.  Their primary
                function is to provide financing for automobile purchases
                usually working through the auto dealer (they also make
                other loans such as mortgages).  These include "General
                Motors Acceptance  Corporation" (GMAC); Ford Motor Credit,
                Chrysler Credit Corporation, and  similar companies
                affiliated with foreign car manufacturers.

        Balanced fund:  A mutual fund that has a balanced portfolio of
                stocks and bonds.

        Balloon loan:  Used for some automobile loans.  It is like an
                installment loan with regular monthly payments, except that
                the payments are designed to pay back only the difference
                between the price of the car and its resale value at the end
                of the loan.

        Balloon mortgage:  A mortgage with a large balloon payment.

        Balloon payment:  A payment due at the end of the term for a loan or
                mortgage which is much larger than other payments.  This is
                occurs when loan payments are set up to pay the loan off
                over a long period (like 30 years) but where the loan is
                actually due after a short period (say 2 to 5 years) or with
                "interest only" or "single-payment" loans.
       Page EDIT-096


        Bank-type credit card:  MasterCard, Visa, Discover, Optima.  These
                are cards which allow balances to be paid back gradually
                (and charge interest).  Discover is issued by Sears and
                Optima is issued by American Express.  Visa and MasterCard
                are issued by banks, S & L's and other institutions.

        Bankers acceptance:  Like a CD or Certificate of Deposit.  A promise
                by a bank to pay a specified amount at a set point in the
                future (usually 4 to 6 months)-treat like a CD.

        Blind pool:  See public syndicate.

        Book value:  The value of the owners' share of a business as given
                by the accounting books.  This may differ from "market
                value," which is what someone would pay for it.

        Bond:  Also known as debentures, bills, or notes.  A bond is a
                written promise to pay back a fixed amount on a specified
                future date.  Generally they have fixed interest rates
                (called coupon rates) and interest is paid every six months.
                They are issued by the U.S. Government ("Treasury bonds")
                and its agencies, foreign governments, corporations, and
                state and municipal governments.  A "bill" is a type of bond
                with an original maturity (term) of less than one year.
                "Notes" are bonds with a maturity of 1 to 10 years and
                regular bonds are those with a maturity of more than 10
                years.  A "debenture" is a bond backed by the general assets
                of the issuer.

        Brokerage:  Also known as brokers, stock brokers, brokerage
                companies, investment bankers, or investment firms.  These
                are companies whose primary function is to buy and sell
                stocks, bonds, and other securities (they differ from real
                estate brokers who buy and sell houses).   They also offer
                money market and IRA and Keogh accounts.  "Full service"
                brokers also offer advice on stock purchases and other
                financial matters; "discount brokers" only buy and sell
                stock.  Money market mutual funds are generally run by
                brokerages.  The most common brokerages are Dean Witter
                Reynolds, Merrill Lynch, Paine Webber, Prudential Bache,
                Charles Schwab, Shearson Lehman Hutton, and Smith Barney.

        Buydown:  A type of adjustable rate mortgage where the seller
                provides an interest subsidy which lowers the monthly
                payments for the first few years.  Like a "graduated
                payment" mortgage, it can have fixed or variable rates.

        Bypass trust:  See marital trust.
       Page EDIT-097


        Call account:  Also called a cash account.  A customer account at a
                stock brokerage which holds the proceeds of stock that has
                been sold which has not yet been re-invested.  It may also
                hold money temporarily before stock is purchased.  Call
                accounts may or may not pay interest.  Those that do pay
                interest are indistinguishable from money market funds.

        Cap:  Refers to adjustable rate mortgages.  Generally the interest
                rate on an adjustable rate mortgage cannot go above (or
                below) a certain amount no matter what the index it is tied
                to does.  The highest or lowest the rate can go over the
                life of the mortgage is referred to as a "aggregate rate
                cap."  The most that the rate can change at any one time is
                called a "periodic rate cap."  Sometimes the monthly payment
                cannot go above a certain amount.  This is called a "payment
                cap."


        Capital gains:  This refers to changes in the value of assets since
                they were purchased.  This can apply to virtually any asset
                including stocks, bonds, mutual funds, real estate, or
                businesses.  If an asset has gone up in value, then the
                difference between its current value and its cost when it
                was purchased is called a "capital gain."  If the asset has
                gone down in value, then difference is called a capital
                loss.  If the asset is sold, then the gain (or loss) is
                called a "realized capital gain (or loss)."  If the asset
                has not been sold, it is referred to as an "unrealized
                capital gain (or loss)."

        Cash account:  See call account.

        Cash management accounts (CMAs):  Also known as financial management
                accounts.  These are accounts offered by brokerages.  Money
                in the account can be invested in tax-free and other money
                market accounts.  It can also be invested in mutual funds or
                directly in stocks or bonds.  Normally they will offer
                check-writing privileges as part of the account.  Other
                features offered will be a Visa or MasterCard Credit card
                and a personal borrowing line of credit. Typically the
                minimum amount needed to open one of these accounts is
                $10,000.

        Cash settlement:  Also called a "lump-sum distribution."  Sometimes
                persons leaving a job receive a check the pay off their
                accumulated pension "rights."  By law, the employee must
                receive back at least the money they themselves contributed
                to the plan.  Depending on their years of service they can
                get more.  Sometimes people leaving a job at normal
                retirement age may chose to take a cash settlement instead
                of a regular monthly retirement pension.  Money from cash
                settlements is not taxable if it is put into an IRA (or
                another qualified pension plan) within 60 days.
       Page EDIT-098


        Cash value:  The accumulated savings portion of a cash value life
                insurance policy.  This is the amount that the policy-holder
                would receive if they canceled or "cashed out" the policy.
                It is also the maximum amount that can be borrowed against
                the policy.

        Cash value life insurance:  Known under a variety of names
                including: "whole life," "straight life," or "ordinary
                life."  This is insurance which serves as both a protection
                against death and a savings vehicle.  A portion of the
                premiums paid each year (usually a fixed total amount) go to
                pay for death protection and a portion are put into various
                "savings accounts" which accumulate a "cash value."  Unlike
                term insurance policies the policy-holder receives the cash
                value if they cancel the policy.  Policy-holders can borrow
                against the cash value of the insurance, often at very low
                interest rates.  "Dividends" are also paid on the savings
                portion of the policy which can be used to offset premium
                payments or added to the account.  Policy dividends are not
                taxable.  Some cash value policies are paid out at a certain
                age if the person does not die ("endowment life").  Most
                policies have fixed premiums and death benefits.  However,
                "modified whole life" has decreasing death benefits;
                "Limited life" requires premiums for only a set number of
                years, although benefits continue forever; "adjustable
                life," allows variation in both the premiums and death
                benefits.  "Universal life" and "variable life" policies
                allow a much more  flexible savings portions of the policy.

        Certificates of Deposit (CD's):  Also known as savings certificates.
                These are deposits held at banks, Savings and loans, or
                credit unions for a fixed period of time that pay interest.
                CD's can have different  maturity dates between 7 days and 8
                years, most are between 3 months and 3  years.  Most CD's
                pay a fixed interest rate.  The investor has the option of
                getting monthly interest checks or getting it all when the
                CD is due.  Some large CD's, called "negotiable CD's" can be
                sold on the secondary market.

        CHAMPUS:  A similar program is CHAMPVA.  This is the health
                insurance program for active military personnel.

        Clifford trust:  A type of trust set up to help pay for children's
                education.

        Closed-end mutual fund:  A type of mutual fund which is really an
                investment company.  These funds sell stock in themselves
                rather than "shares."

        Closed-end lease:  A type of lease (auto) where fixed monthly
                payments are made based on estimated mileage.  When the
                lease expires, the car can be simply returned, and, if the
                mileage is less than the specified amount, the lessor owes
                nothing.
       Page EDIT-099


        Closing costs:  Refers primarily to purchases of real estate.  These
                are expenses related to the purchase which are often split
                between the buyer and the seller.  These would include:
                transfer taxes, attorney fees, appraisal costs, inspection
                fees, real estate broker commissions, mortgage points, title
                insurance, and sometimes, tax reserves.  Although buyers
                must pay for some of these items, they are not considered
                part of the purchase price.

        Collateral:  Property, goods or other assets which must be pledged
                as part of a loan.  If the borrower defaults on the loan the
                lender has the right to "foreclose on" (take) the
                collateral.

        Collateralized mortgage obligations (CMO's):  A type of mortgage-
                backed bond, often issued by financial institutions.

        Commercial bank:  Commercial banks offer checking accounts, savings
                accounts, certificates of deposit, consumer and business
                loans, credit cards, and other services such as safety
                deposit boxes and trust accounts.  Some commercial banks now
                even offer brokerage accounts and insurance.  These are
                often referred to as "full-service banks."  They often have
                the word bank in their title, often coupled with the words
                "state" or "national."  If they have the word "savings" in
                their title they usually are not a commercial bank but a
                savings bank.  Sometimes commercial banks will be owned by a
                bank holding company.

        Commercial paper:  Very short term bonds, typically 4 to 6 months,
                issued by very high quality corporations.

        Common stock:  Regular stock or equity ownership in a corporation.

        Consolidation loan:  A loan which consolidates several previous
                loans into one new loan with a single monthly payment.

        Consumer bank:  A type of bank which only deals with individuals not
                corporations.  Many larger organizations use consumer banks
                to issue credit cards (Sears issued the Discover card this
                way).  Otherwise it is just like a regular commercial bank.

        Contributions:  Refers to contributions to a pension plan.  There
                are a number of different contributory arrangements used,
                and some plans allow several different methods.  In some
                plans, only the employer makes contributions (most "defined
                benefit" plans are like this.  In other plans (typically
                those run through unions) the employer makes contributions
                based on specific production items or firm profits.  In
                other plans, employees are required to make contributions.
                In many defined contribution plans, employees can also make
                voluntary contributions.
       Page EDIT-100


        Contributory pension plan:  A plan that permits employees to make
                voluntary supplementary contributions to the plan along with
                employer contributions.  Most contributory plans will be
                "defined contribution plans" or TYPE B.

        Conventional mortgage:  A mortgage which is not part of a federal
                guarantee program (e.g. FHA,  VA, or FMHa).  Most mortgages
                are conventional mortgages.

        Convertible bonds:  A bond which can be converted to stock in a
                company at a certain price.  These are all corporate bonds.

        Convertible mortgage:  Adjustable rate mortgages which can be
                converted into a fixed rate mortgage within a specified time
                period (usually between the 1st and 5th year of the
                mortgage) and at a rate set by a formula or tied to a
                national fixed  rate.  The lender may or may not charge a
                fee to convert the mortgage.

        Corporate bonds:  Bonds used by a corporation.  "Convertible bonds,"
                "convertible debentures," "subordinated bonds," and "junk"
                bonds are all corporate bonds.  If the company uses specific
                assets as collateral for the bonds, they can be called
                "mortgage bonds," "equipment trust certificates," or
                "collateral bonds."  Bonds without collateral are called
                "debentures."

        Corporation:  A form of business where a firm is legally
                "incorporated" and exists separately and distinctly from its
                owners.  Corporations have particular rights and obligations
                which are defined by law.  Generally businesses with the
                word "company" or "Inc." in their title are corporations.
                Corporations are owned by stockholders who own stock and run
                by managers who are hired by the corporation.  The
                stockholders have limited liability in that the most they
                can lose is the value of their stock.  If the stock is
                bought and sold on an exchange, it is called "publicly
                traded."  If a company's stock is not traded is termed
                "privately-held" or "closely-held."

        Credit life:  A type of term life insurance associated with consumer
                loans.  If the borrower dies, the credit life policy will
                automatically pay off the balance of the loan.

        Credit union:  A credit union is cooperative association whose
                membership consists of individuals with some common
                relationship, usually the same employer, labor union,
                church, fraternal association, or even neighborhood.  Credit
                unions offer auto, personal and other loans, savings
                accounts, checking accounts, and CD's to their members.
       Page EDIT-101


        Credited service:  Used in calculating pension fund benefits.  It is
                roughly equivalent to the number of years an employee has
                been included in the plan and been working.  Some plans are
                "portable" so that employees can move to other companies and
                receive credit for previous work.

        Debit card:  A card which can be used in a store very much like a
                credit card.   However, it is not a credit card.  Instead of
                being sent a bill, money is  automatically deducted from
                your checking account to pay for the charges.

        Decreasing term life insurance:  A type of term life insurance where
                the death benefits declines as the insured person gets
                older.

        Deed of trust:  Virtually the same as a mortgage.  In a mortgage,
                the lender has the direct right to foreclose on the property
                if the borrower defaults.  With a deed of trust, the right
                to foreclose is given to a third party, who retains the
                right until the loan is paid off.

        Deferred annuity:  An annuity where premiums are paid well in
                advance of the date annuity payments start.  Often the
                premiums are paid as installments, although "single premium"
                annuities have become much more popular.

        Defined benefit pension plan:  A type of pension which the amount of
                pension benefit is determined by a formula generally based
                on the number of years an employee has worked (credited
                service), the age at which they retire, and their salary or
                wages.  If benefits are based on just a proportion of wages
                or a fixed dollar  amount, it is known as a "flat benefit
                method."  If no account at all is  given to salary or years
                of service it is known as a "flat amount pension plan."  In
                a "flat percentage pension plan" (the most common) account
                is taken  of the employees highest wages and the number of
                years of service (but not necessarily the age of
                retirement).  With a "final-average" plan, the benefits base
                is determined by an employee's average salary over a
                specified period (generally the last 3 to 5 years).  For a
                "unit benefit pension plan" benefits are based on "units"
                which can depend upon lots of things.  These are referred to
                as TYPE A pensions. Some will be combinations of features of
                defined benefit plans and "defined contribution" plans.
       Page EDIT-102


        Defined contribution pension plan:  A type of pension plan where
                benefits depend upon the amount of money built up in an
                account.  Each worker in a firm will have their own account.
                Normally employers make contributions to each employee's
                account typically as a percentage of their salary, although
                contributions can be based on other things such as the
                firm's profits or produced goods etc.  Employees often also
                make contributions to the account (these can be voluntary or
                required contributions).  Typically employees do not have to
                pay taxes on employer's contributions until money is
                withdrawn from the account.  Employees often can choose how
                to invest the money in the account.  Taxes are not paid on
                any of the interest earned by the account until money is
                withdrawn.  This is referred  to as a TYPE B pension.
                Defined contribution pensions are very similar to IRA's,
                401K, 403B, SEP, and other tax-deferred retirement or
                savings plans.

        Discount broker:  A type of brokerage which only buys and sells
                stock and does not give advice. Charles Schwab is the
                largest.

        Employee stock ownership plan (ESOP):  A profit-sharing or pension
                plan for employees where all of the money in the plan is
                invested in the stock of the company where they work.  All
                distributions from the plan are also in the form of stock.
                This is a TYPE B  pension.

        Endowment life insurance policy:  A type of cash value life
                insurance where the face amount is paid off either if the
                insured person dies or if they reach a certain age.

        Equipment trust:  A type of corporate bond.

        Equity (business):  Also called "owner's equity," "shareholders
                equity," or "partner's equity."  This is what would be left
                over for the owners of a corporation, partnership, or sole-
                proprietorship if the assets of the company were sold (or
                liquidated) and all the debts paid off.  "Book equity" uses
                the accounting book estimates of the value of the assets and
                debts to determine the value of the equity.  Partnerships
                are required to file book equity each year on IRS  form
                1065, Schedule L, line 13(d); S corporations on IRS form
                1120S, Schedule L, line 14(d); and other corporations, IRS
                form 1120, Schedule L, line 14(d) or 1120a, part II, line
                11(b).  "Market equity" is what the stock or ownership
                rights of the company would sell for on the open market.

        Equity (house):  The difference between the value of the house and
                the amount owed on mortgages against the house.

        Equity (stock):  Another name for stock in a corporation.
       Page EDIT-103


        Equity (trust):  The assets in a trust.  If someone has the right to
                the equity in a trust it means that they will eventually
                receive the assets in it.  In some cases recipients only
                have rights to income from a trust and never receive the
                equity.

        Face value:  Refers to bonds, CD's, and life insurance policies.
                For bonds or CD's this is the amount that the bond or CD was
                originally issued for, and normally will also be the amount
                paid when the bond or CD is due.  For life insurance
                policies this is the amount that is paid (under normal
                circumstances) when the insured person dies.

        Fannie-Mae:  See Federal National Mortgage Association

        Farm Credit Bank:  A U.S. government agency that issues bonds.

        Farmers Home Mortgage Administration:  A U.S. government agency that
                guarantees mortgages for farmers.  Similar to FHA or VA
                programs.

        Federal Agency bonds:  Bonds issued by agencies of the U.S.
                government.  These include the "Farm Credit Banks," the
                "Export-Import Bank," the "Student Loan Marketing
                Association" ("Sallie-Mae"), the "Postal Service," the
                "Tennessee Valley Authority," the "Federal Financing Bank,"
                and the "Federal Home Loan Banks."  In addition some federal
                agencies issue bonds tied to mortgages.  These include the
                "Government National Mortgage Association" ("Ginnie-Mae or
                GNMA), the "Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation"
                ("Freddie-Mac" or FHLMC), and the "Federal National Mortgage
                Association" ("Fannie-Mae" or FNMA).

        Federal Financing Bank (FFB):  A U.S. government agency that issues
                bonds.

        Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB):  A U.S. government agency that
                issues bonds.

        Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ("Freddie-Mac" or FHLMC):  A
                U.S. government agency which issues bonds backed by
                mortgages (also known as mortgage participation pools or
                pass throughs).

        Federal Housing Administration (FHA):  A U.S. government agency
                which insures mortgages, agreeing to pay the lender up to a
                preset amount should the borrower default.  Both the
                property and the borrower must meet certain standards in
                order to be eligible for insurance.  Borrowers can often
                borrow with much lower downpayments than otherwise.  The
                borrower pays a fee of 1/2 percentage point per year for the
                insurance.
       Page EDIT-104


        Federal National Mortgage Association ("Fannie-Mae" or FNMA):  A
                U.S. government agency which issues bonds backed by
                mortgages (also known as mortgage participation pools or
                pass throughs).

        Final-average pension plan:  A defined benefit (TYPE A) pension plan
                where the benefits base is determined by an employee's
                average salary over a specified period (generally the last 3
                to 5 years).

        Fixed annuity:  An annuity where the premiums and payments are
                fixed.

        Fixed rate mortgage:  A mortgage where the interest rate and monthly
                payments (unless they include taxes) remains constant over
                the life of the loan.

        Flat benefit method:  A type of defined benefit (TYPE A) pension
                plan where benefits are determined solely by salary or are a
                fixed amount.

        Flat amount pension plan:  A type of defined benefit (TYPE A)
                pension plan where all employees receive the same benefits
                regardless of salary or years of service.

        Flat percentage pension plan:  A type of defined benefit (TYPE A)
                pension plan where benefits are determined by the employee's
                highest wages and years of service (and  sometimes age of
                retirement).

        401(K):  See salary reduction plans.

        403(B):  See salary reduction plans.

        Freddie-Mac:  See Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.

        Futures contract:  A purchase of the right to buy or sell
                commodities at a specific point in the future.  These are
                traded on futures exchanges and have values.

        Ginnie-Mae:  See Government National Mortgage Association.

        Government National Mortgage Association ("Ginnie-Mae or GNMA):  A
                U.S. government agency which issues bonds backed by
                mortgages (also known as mortgage participation pools or
                pass throughs).

        Graduated payment mortgage (GPM):  An adjustable rate mortgage which
                is preset to start with low monthly payments which gradually
                increase over time.  Generally the interest rate does not
                depend upon another interest index.

        Grantor:  The person who sets up a trust.
       Page EDIT-105


        Gross receipts or sales:  The amount of money earned by a business
                before subtracting and costs or taxes.  It may also be
                referred to as gross revenues.  For sole-proprietorships it
                is the amount on IRS form 1040, Schedule C, line 1c; for
                partnerships it is IRS form 1065, line 1c; for S
                corporations it is IRS form 1120S, line 1c; and other
                corporations, IRS form 1120 (or 1120a), line 1c.

        Growing equity mortgage (GEM):  A type of mortgage which has a fixed
                interest rate, but has payments which rise over the life of
                the mortgage.  The increase in payment size speeds up the
                repayment period of the loan.  This is not an adjustable
                rate mortgage.

        Growth fund:  Also "growth and income."  A type of mutual fund
                investing in stocks.

        Guaranteed Mortgage certificates (GMC's):  A type of mortgage-backed
                bond, often issued by financial institutions.

        Home equity line of credit:  A line of credit which is
                collateralized by a person's home.  Legally a home equity
                line of credit is a mortgage with the lender having the
                right to foreclose on the home.  However, unlike most
                mortgages the amount borrowed can be added to or paid off at
                any time at the convenience of the borrowers.

        Home equity loan:  Any loan which is collateralized by a person's
                home.  All mortgages or home equity lines of credit are
                technically home equity loans.  However, when the term is
                used here it is restricted to loans which are collateralized
                by the home, but have a fixed number of payments and a fixed
                amount borrowed.

        Immediate annuity:  An annuity where monthly benefit payments start
                immediately after the payment of one large premium.

        Income funds:  Mutual funds invested in a combination of bonds and
                high-yield stocks.

        Index fund:  A type of mutual fund investing in stocks.

        Individual Retirement Account (IRA):  These accounts are designed to
                permit an individual to make annual tax-deductible
                contributions (usually up to $2,000 per person per year) to
                the account in preparation for retirement.  No taxes are
                paid on the income earned in theaccount until it is
                withdrawn.  Most IRA's will be at a bank, Savings and Loan,
                brokerage, insurance company, or with employers.  A penalty
                must be paid if the funds in the IRA are spent or withdrawn
                before the person is 59 1/2.

        Initial interest rate:  The starting rate in the first year for an
                adjustable rate mortgage.
       Page EDIT-106


        Insurance trust:  A trust set up with the proceeds of a life
                insurance policy.  Often set up by courts when a person dies
                and leaves insurance to minor children.

        Insured pension plan:  A pension plan which is administered by an
                insurance company on contract for employees of another
                company or union.  Most of the time these will be defined
                benefit, or TYPE A plans, but they can also be TYPE B.

        Interest rate adjustment period:  The period between rate changes
                for an adjustable rate mortgage.  The most common are 6
                months, 1 year, 3 years, and 5 years.

        Interest rate adjustment index:  An index used to determine the
                interest rate for adjustable rate mortgages.  The interest
                rate charged on the loan is usually equal to the value of
                the index rate plus an extra amount called the "margin" or
                "spread."  The most common indices are: the three-month, six
                month, one year, three year, and five year U.S. Treasury
                rate; the National Average FHLB Mortgage contract rate; the
                national or regional average cost of funds for FSLIC-insured
                Associations.

        Investment club:  A group of individuals who buy stock together.

        Investment company:  A firm which organizes and manages a mutual
                fund.

        Investment Trust:  See Trust.

        IRA rollover:  An IRA set up with the proceeds of a cash settlement
                from a qualified employer-sponsored pension plan received
                when leaving a job.

        Irrevocable trust:  A trust which cannot be changed by the grantor.

        Joint and last survivor annuity:  An annuity which covers two people
                and continues paying one (usually a reduced amount) if one
                of them dies.  Since 1985 all pensions have this provision
                for married recipients unless both husband and wife
                specifically chose not to take it.

        Junk bond:  A high-yield corporate bond.

        Keogh Plans:  Also called H.R. 10 plans.  These plans are very
                similar to IRA's, but are available only to self-employed
                individuals and their employees.  Eligible people may
                contribute up to 20% of their income to a Keogh account each
                year (up to a maximum of $30,000).  No taxes are paid on the
                contributions or earnings in the plan until it is withdrawn.
                A penalty must be paid if the funds in the Keogh are spent
                or withdrawn before the person is 59 1/2.
       Page EDIT-107


        Land contract:  Also known a conditional sale agreement.  A contract
                between a property owner and a potential purchaser, where
                they agree on the price of the home and the purchaser moves
                into the property.  However, the seller retains legal rights
                to the property.

        Lease-purchase agreement:  A contract sometimes used in real estate
                where someone rents or leases a home, but has the right to
                apply their rent payments toward the purchase of the home,
                typically at a pre-agreed price.  A land contract is a form
                of lease purchase.

        Limited partnership:  A type of partnership where some of the
                partners, termed "general partners," actively manage the
                partnership, and other partners, termed "limited partners"
                are only passive investors.  Many "tax-shelters" are limited
                partnerships.  Many partnerships set up to buy stock or real
                estate are limited partnerships and operate just like mutual
                funds.

        Limited payment life insurance:  A type of cash value life insurance
                where premiums are only paid for a specific period of time,
                but coverage continues forever.  A "single  premium" policy
                is a form of limited payment life.

        Line of credit:  A formal agreement between a borrower and lender
                which allows the borrower to borrow as much or little as
                they wish up to a pre-specified maximum.  The maximum is
                known as the "credit limit."  "Check overdraft protection"
                is usually a line of credit.  If the line of credit is
                secured by the equity in someone's home, it is called a
                "home equity line of credit."

        Living trust:  Also known as an "inter-vivo" trust.  A trust which
                is set up during the grantor's lifetime.  In some cases, the
                grantor is also the trustee and the beneficiary.

        Load mutual fund:  A mutual fund which charges a commission to buy
                shares.

        Managed investment account:  A portfolio of stocks and bonds which
                is managed by a professional manager, usually for a fee
                based on the value of the assets in the account.

        Margin (on stock):  Stock purchases where the purchaser borrows part
                of the purchase price from a bank or brokerage.  The amount
                borrowed is limited by law to 50 percent of the value of the
                stock.  "Margin loans" refer to the amount borrowed for the
                purchase.  Technically, anytime stock is used as collateral
                for a loan, even if it is already owned, it is called a
                margin loan.
       Page EDIT-108


        Marital trust:  Also known as a "bypass trust" or a "Q-tip trust."
                A type of trust where money is left to a spouse.  Often the
                spouse only receives income from the trust and the principal
                is passed on to children or others when the spouse dies.

        Maximum capital gain:  A type of mutual fund investing in stocks.

        Medicare:  A federal health insurance program which pays for most
                doctor and hospital expenses.  Most persons 65 and older are
                eligible for Medicare.  Persons under 65 with major kidney
                failure or those receiving Social Security Disability
                payments are also eligible for medicare.

        Medicaid:  A federal health program which pays for health costs of
                eligible low-income families.  Most families receiving cash
                welfare payments are eligible as well as certain other
                institutionalized persons.

        Medigap:  Private medical insurance which pays for hospital or
                doctor expenses not covered by medicare.  Sometimes called
                "supplementary medicare insurance."

        Modified whole life:  A cash value life insurance policy with a
                decreasing death benefit over time.

        Money market accounts:  There are two different types of money
                market accounts.  Those at banks, savings and loans, and
                credit unions are known as "Money Market Deposit Accounts."
                Those run through brokerages (or independent managers) are
                known as money market mutual fund accounts.  See separate
                descriptions of these two items.

        Money market deposit account (MMDA):  Money market type accounts
                offered at banks, credit unions, or savings and loans.
                These are accounts which are like savings accounts but which
                generally offer higher interest rates.  They have been
                available since 1982.  They will generally also offer
                limited check-writing, and normally have minimum balance
                requirements.
       Page EDIT-109


        Money market mutual fund (MMMF):  Also known as money market funds.
                These are money market accounts run by brokerages or
                independent managers. These accounts have been available
                since 1972.  They are not federally insured but otherwise
                they are very similar to money market accounts at banks.
                There is usually a minimum amount needed to open an account
                (typically $1,000) and checks can be written against the
                account (usually there is minimum size for checks) and
                amounts added at any time.  Legally these accounts are
                really shares of funds invested in high-yield, short-term
                instruments such as U.S. treasury bills, corporations'
                commercial paper, or bank CD's.  The interest rate paid on
                the account varies from day-to-day depending on the
                performance of the fund.  Interest on some of these accounts
                are tax-free because the fund is invested in tax-exempt
                notes of states or municipal governments.

        Mortgage:  Any loan which is collateralized by a home or other real
                estate.  The lender files a lien with the court system which
                gives them the right to foreclose (take over) the property
                should the borrower default on the loan.

        Mortgage company:  Also known as mortgage bankers.  These companies
                generally only make home mortgages.  Often they will only
                make VA or FHA mortgages.  They often sell the mortgage to
                someone else after they make it.  They will generally
                continue to service the mortgage (receive the payments).
                Some are affiliated with banks or finance companies
                (including automobile finance companies).  They will often
                have the word "mortgage" in their title.

        Mortgage investment trust:  Also called mortgage mutual funds.  A
                type of mutual fund which invests in mortgages.

        Mortgage life insurance:  A life insurance policy which pays off the
                outstanding balance on a mortgage if the insured person
                dies.

        Municipal bonds:  Also known as "Muni's."  Bonds issued by state and
                local governments which are generally free from federal
                income tax.  These can be owned directly or through mutual
                funds.

        Mutual fund:  A fund which offers investors the opportunity to
                invest in a portfolio of stocks, bonds, or other assets
                without having to own them  directly.  These are not
                accounts, but are "shares" which are sold to the public.
                Mutual funds specialize in investing in a wide variety of
                assets.
       Page EDIT-110


        Net income (business):  The gross receipts or sales of a business
                minus all costs except taxes  (net before-tax income).  It
                can be a positive or negative number (losses).   For sole-
                proprietorships it is the amount on IRS form 1040, Schedule
                C, line  31; for partnerships it is IRS form 1065, line 21;
                for S corporations it is IRS form 1120S, line 21; and other
                corporations, IRS form 1120, line 28 or 1120a, line 24.
 
        Non-contributory pension plan:  A pension plan where all
                contributions are made by the employer.

        NOW account:  A checking account which pays interest.

        Open-ended lease (auto):  A type of lease with fixed monthly
                payments.  When the lease expires the car is appraised and
                compared to an initial estimate of its value made at the
                time of the lease.  If the car is worth less than the
                initial amount then the lessor must pay the difference.

        Open-ended mutual fund:  A type of mutual fund where the owners
                share indirect ownership in the  assets of the fund.  Most
                mutual funds are open-ended.

        Panel Medicine Plan:  A private comprehensive health care coverage
                plan similar to an HMO.

        Participation certificates (PC's):  A type of mortgage-backed bond,
                often issued by financial institutions.

        Partnership:  An association of two or more people who jointly own a
                business or property and which is not formally incorporated
                as a corporation.  A  partnership may or may not file
                separate tax returns.

        Points:  Equal to one percent of the value of a mortgage.  Often
                borrowers must pay a certain number of points as part of
                closing costs for a property.  Interest rates are often
                expressed as points.

        Policy loan:  A loan against the cash value of a cash value life
                insurance policy.

        Portable pension plan:  A pension plan where benefit rights (or
                accounts) can be taken with you when you leave a job.  These
                benefits are usually taken in the form of a cash settlement
                and are free from taxation if reinvested in an IRA (or
                another qualified pension plan) within 60 days.  If a plan
                is not portable the employee will have to leave their rights
                in the plan to be taken later as retirement payments.

        Preferred Provider Organizations (PPO's):  An organization offering
                comprehensive medical coverage similar to an HMO.  Members
                are usually restricted to using certain services.
       Page EDIT-111


        Preferred stock:  Stock issued by corporations which usually has a
                set dividend rate and no voting rights.  If the company goes
                bankrupt, though, preferred stock is paid off before common
                stock.

        Principal:  The amount borrowed on a loan.  It does not include any
                interest or finance charges.

        Private mortgage insurance (PMI):  A contract offered by a private
                company which agrees to repay a lender both principal and
                interest should a mortgage borrower default.  Typically
                mortgages with a downpayment with less than 20 percent will
                require either PMI or comparable insurance with a federal
                program.  The insurance is paid for by "extra" interest paid
                by the borrower (typically 1/4 percent per year).

        Private syndicate: A type of partnership which buys real estate.

        Profit-sharing pension plan:  A type of defined contribution (TYPE
                B) pension plan whereby an employer makes contributions to
                an employee's tax-deferred account based on a formula
                dependent upon the companies profits.  Contributions are
                limited to 15 percent of the employee's salary.

        Public syndicate:  Also known as a blind pool.  A large limited
                partnership which buys real estate, often many pieces.
                Shares of the partnership can be purchased by the general
                public.

        Publicly traded stock:  Stock which is traded on an organized
                exchange, including the New York Stock Exchange, the
                American Stock Exchange, and the "over-the-counter"
                (NASDAQ).

        Qualified pension plan:  A pension plan which meets a set of
                government-mandated requirements for procedures, fundings,
                reporting, and employee rights.  Only contributions made to
                qualified plans can be tax-deferred.

        Real estate investment trust (REIT):  A closed-end investment
                company, or mutual fund, which derives at least 70 percent
                of its income from real estate.  Many REIT's are publicly
                held and their shares are traded on exchanges.

        Renewable term insurance:  A type of term insurance which cannot be
                canceled by the insurance company even if the insured party
                becomes sick.

        Repurchase agreement:  A very short-term (1 to 7 days) CD at a bank
                often for very large amounts--treat as a CD.

        Revocable trust:  A trust which can be changed by the grantor.
       Page EDIT-112


        Revolving charge account:  A charge account which allows you to
                purchase goods or services up to a specified credit limit
                and requires only minimum payment rather than payment of the
                full balance.  MasterCard, Visa, and most retail store
                credit cards are revolving charges.  A revolving charge does
                not have to use credit cards though.

        Rollover mortgage:  Very similar to a balloon mortgage.  Fixed
                payments are made as though the mortgage would be paid off
                over a long period like 30 years.  However, by preset
                agreement, the entire terms of the mortgage are renegotiated
                after a much shorter period (normally 5 years).

        S Corporation:  A special type of corporation set up to take
                advantage of certain tax breaks.  The corporation itself
                does not pay taxes, but the tax liability (income or losses)
                is passed on to its owners.  Otherwise they are just like
                other corporations.  S corporations are generally small (no
                more than 35 stockholders) and often are new firms.  S
                corporations will not be  publicly-traded.

        Salary reduction plans:  Also known as 401(k) or 403(B) plans or
                "deferred salary plans."  These are TYPE B plans.  403(B)
                plans are available only to certain educators and employees
                of non-profit organizations (these are also known as tax-
                sheltered annuities).  401(K) plans are offered by many for-
                profit companies.  Under both plans, a portion of the
                employee's salary is deposited into an account with federal
                income taxes deferred on the amount deposited and all
                earnings in the account.  Up to $7,000 a year can be
                contributed to 401(K) plans.

        Savings bank:  A type of financial institution which is functionally
                the same as a Savings and Loan.  They are located primarily
                in the Northeast and Washington State.  They often will have
                the name "Savings Bank" or "Mutual" in their titles.

        Savings and Loan Association (S & L):  These are financial
                institutions similar to commercial banks which offer a wide
                variety of consumer services including checking, savings and
                CD accounts; personal, auto and other consumer loans; and
                mortgages.  Sometimes their deposits will be referred to as
                shares.  Their names will generally include the words
                "Savings and Loan" or "Savings Association."  A few are also
                known as "building and loans," and, in New England, as
                Cooperative banks.  They often will have the words "federal"
                or "state" in their title.
       Page EDIT-113


        Savings bonds:  Small bonds issued by the U.S. Government. Bonds
                sell for one-half their "face" value, starting with a
                purchase price of $50 up to $5,000.  Bonds held for less
                than five years pay 6 percent interest and those held longer
                can pay more.  No tax is paid on the interest on the bonds
                until they are cashed in.  All bonds titled Series E, EE, H,
                or HH are savings bonds.

        Second mortgage:  An additional mortgage on a house.  Home equity
                loans or lines of credit are often legal second mortgages.

        Seller take-back:  When the seller provides a first or second
                mortgage for a purchaser of a property.

        Share account:  The technical name given to savings accounts at
                credit unions.

        Share draft account:  The technical name given to checking accounts
                at credit unions.

        Shared appreciation mortgages (SAM):  A type of mortgage where in
                return for a lower interest rate, the lender gets a share
                (typically one-third) of any increases in the value of the
                home.

        Short sale:  A means of selling stock you do not currently own at
                a set price now, with an agreement that you purchase it back
                sometime in the future.  The value of the short sale
                contract is the difference between the current price of the
                stock and the price you sold it for.

        Simplified employee pension (SEP/IRA):  A retirement plan where an
                employee can make supplemental deposits to an IRA.  A SEP/
                IRA is most often offered by an employer who does not have a
                qualified pension plan.  The employer can contribute an
                amount up to 15 percent of salary or $15,000 whichever is
                less.  Otherwise this is the same as an IRA.

        Single payment loan:  A loan where the entire principal (and
                interest) is paid back at one time.

        Sole-proprietorship:  A business which has a single (or family)
                owner and is not incorporated.  Generally sole-proprietors
                will file IRS 1040 form Schedule C or F.  Most very small
                businesses and farms are sole-proprietorships.

        Spousal benefits:  A term sometimes used for Social Security benefit
                payments based on the earnings of your spouse.
       Page EDIT-114


        Spousal pension:  A pension received by a widow from the job of
                their ex-spouse.  Some spousal pensions last for the widow's
                lifetime.  Others last only a set number of years.  In some
                cases, particularly with divorce, it is possible to receive
                spousal benefits while your spouse is alive.  Social
                Security and military pensions also provide pensions for
                spouses.

        Signature loan:  A personal loan usually with no collateral.

        Stock:  Ownership shares in a corporation.

        Stock options:  Rights to buy stock at a preset price.  Companies
                may give their top executives stock options as part of their
                compensation.  Some of them can be bought and sold on the
                open market.  Stock options might be part of a TYPE B
                pension plan.

        Stock partnership:  A partnership set up primarily to buy and sell
                stocks.  Often this may be just like a mutual fund.

        Straight life insurance:  See cash value life insurance.

        Student Loan Marketing Association ("Sallie-Mae" or SLMA):  A U.S.
                government agency that guarantees student loans and provides
                money for federally provided loans.  It also issues bonds.

        Subordinated bond:  A type of corporate bond.

        Summary Plan Description (SPD):  A description of the pension rights
                and procedures which must be made available to all
                participants in a company pension plan.

        Super NOW account:  A checking account at a bank, S & L, or credit
                union that pays a high rate of interest.  Often there is a
                minimum balance required.

        Supplemental medical insurance (SMI):  A part of the medicare
                program for those wanting extra coverage.

        Supplemental retirement annuity (SRA):  A supplemental retirement
                plan often set up for employees that want to make extra
                contributions on their own to a pension plan.  Normally a
                TYPE B plan.

        Supplemental Social Security (SSI):  A form of public assistance
                paid to blind or disabled persons who are not covered under
                the Social Security program.
       Page EDIT-115


        Survivors' benefits:  The government now requires the pensions of
                all married employees have survivor pensions which their
                spouse continues to receive (a portion) even if the
                employee dies.  This is called a "joint and last survivor
                annuity."  Unless both the employee and their spouse sign
                away this right it is automatic.  The law also specifies
                rights to a widow if an employee who is vested in a plan
                dies before they begin to receive benefits.

        Tax basis:  The cost of a property, business, or good as determined
                for tax purposes.  If a property is sold, capital gain taxes
                are assessed on the difference between the selling price of
                the property and its tax basis.  Generally the tax basis is
                the amount paid for the property or business.

        Tax-deferred savings plan:  This refers to any employer-provided
                savings plan where taxes are deferred on some or all of the
                contributions to the plan or on the earnings of the plan
                (TYPE B plans).

        Tax shelters:  Generally a limited partnership set up to provide
                tax benefits for investors.  Use of these was sharply
                curtailed by the 1986 tax reform.

        Term:  Also known as maturity.  Refers to many financial
                instruments, including leases, bonds, loans, mortgages,
                CD's, etc.  It is length of time between when the asset was
                issued and when it is due.

        Term insurance:  Life insurance which provides only death
                protection. "Renewable term" cannot be canceled by the
                insurance company even if the insured party becomes sick.
                "Decreasing term"  has coverage which declines as someone
                gets older.  "Mortgage or credit" life is a form of term
                insurance which pays off the balance on a mortgage or other
                loan if the person dies.

        Term loan:  A loan from a bank with a maturity of more than one
                year.

        Testamentary trust:  A trust set up by a will.

        Thrift plan:  A partially tax-deferred savings plan (TYPE B).  Under
                this plan, employers can partially or wholly match voluntary
                contributions made by an employee to a thrift account.  The
                maximum amount which can be contributed (and matched) is 6
                percent of salary.  The employer's contribution and
                accumulated earnings are not taxed until withdrawn from the
                account.  Unlike 401(K) or 403(B) accounts the employee
                contributions are taxed.  However, they can be withdrawn
                from the account without penalty or tax.
       Page EDIT-116


        Treasury bonds:  Also Treasury bills or notes.  Bonds issued by the
                U.S. government.  Generally sold in minimum amounts of
                $10,000.  These can be owned directly or as part of
                mutual funds.

        Trust:  A trust is an arrangement whereby the right to property is
                held by one party, the "trustee" (or manager), for the
                benefit of another, the "beneficiary."   The person who sets
                up the trust (and provides its assets) is called the
                "grantor."

        Trustee:  A person who manages a trust.  Often a bank or financial
                institution.   It can also be a lawyer or private
                individual.

        Trusteed pension plan:  A pension plan which is managed by a
                commercial bank for another company or union.  Normally
                these are defined benefit, or TYPE A, plans but they can
                also be TYPE B.
                  
        Unemployment compensation:  Money paid by states to unemployed
                persons.  Benefits are usually only paid to people who have
                been laid off or fired.  Benefits continue only for a set
                period of time, and are taxable by the federal government.

        Unfunded pension plan:  A pension plan in which no specific funds
                have been set aside to pay for future pension benefits.
                Normally these are defined benefit, or TYPE A, plans.

        Unit benefit pension plan:  A type of defined benefit (TYPE A)
                pension plan where benefits are determined by the number of
                units an employee has earned.  Units can depend on a variety
                of different things.

        Unit investment trust:  A form of mutual fund.  Normally these are
                not actively managed portfolios (they just buy something
                and hold it).  Shares in them are called units and managers
                called trustees.  These are often difficult to sell.

        Universal life insurance:  A type of cash value life insurance where
                the policy-holder has a fair amount of control over the
                savings portion of their policy.  The policy-holder can vary
                the amount put in the account each year.

        Variable annuity:  An annuity where payments depend upon the
                investment performance of a fund.

        Variable life insurance:  A type of cash value life insurance where
                the policy-holder has a choice in how the savings portion of
                their policy is invested.  Very similar to "universal life."
       Page EDIT-117


        Vesting:  A term used in describing rights in a pension plan.  A
                person is said to be vested if they have rights to money in
                a plan which cannot be lost even if they leave their
                employer.  Federal law sets minimum standards for vesting.
                All of an employee's own contributions to a plan must be
                immediately vested.

        Veterans Administration (VA, housing):  A U.S. government program
                which provides guarantees for mortgages of eligible
                veterans, paying off the lender should the borrower default.

        Warrants:  Rights to buy stock.

        Zero-coupon bond:  A type of bond where no payments of principal or
                interest are made  until the bond is due.  Both the U.S.
                government and corporations issued zero-coupon bonds.
       Page EDIT-118


        (NOTE: This page is blank.)
